---
layout: post
title: Building a Semi-Autonomous Surveillance bot
category: showcases
---

The Patrol Bot project proposes the creation of a surveillance robot designed to monitor bike racks around campus for signs of bike theft. By leveraging object detection models, threat computation algorithms, and a back-end web server, the robot aims to support campus police by reducing their workload.

---

<h2 style="text-align: center;">High-Level Design</h2>

## Web Server

The idea includes developing a web application to act as a centralized hub for all project components, facilitating communication between users and various system elements. With a foundation in the Django web framework and hosted on AWS Elastic Beanstalk, the web server would handle the camera feed transmitted from the robot via AWS Kinesis, along with GPS coordinates and movement requests through AWS IoT. The application would also offer access to past recordings and captured frames of suspicious behavior for future reference.

## Robot

The envisioned robot would operate on Ubuntu 18.04 and utilize ROS Melodic, complemented by the AWS Python SDK, to provide necessary telemetry data. The proposed hardware configuration includes:

* 4WD Rover Zero 3 Robot
* Raspberry Pi 4 that serves as the robot controller for processing local communication to the web server
* Raspberry Pi 3B+ for camera communication
* Stemedu VK172 - GPS Module
* Charmcast 10000mAH - Portable Battery to power both Raspberry Pis

<h2 style="text-align: center;">Maching Learning</h2>

### Object Detection Model

The proposal suggests employing a custom object detection model based on the YOLOv5 architecture to identify:

* People
* Bikes
* Malicious objects like angle grinders and bolt cutters

Roboflow could be used to develop a custom dataset focused on bike-theft scenarios, incorporating the listed objects as primary interests and applying image augmentation techniques.

### Action Detect Model

An inflated 3D convolutional neural network could be trained on a dataset distinguishing between normal crowd behavior and aggressive individual behavior. The goal would be to classify vigorous actions that may require immediate attention from security personnel.

### Threat Detection Algorithm

The threat detection algorithm is proposed to evaluate potential threats and alert users if a bike theft seems imminent. This algorithm would use intersection-over-union metrics of bounding boxes provided by the object detection model to assess whether a potential threat surpasses a predefined threshold.
